[music]
I've been working in search for 20 plus
years. Uh all the way back when it was
uh uh you know, white text on a white
background and spamming Google and all
kinds of fun things. Sounds like the
intro to like a marketers anonymous kind
of conference or something. But anyway,
I've been working in search for a long
time. Uh I know what I'm doing. I've
been paying attention. Um I currently
work at a company called Raptive. Um we
are a very big uh publisher. We work
with about 6,000 sites across the open
web. uh creators, media companies, and
so on. Um, and I'm not going to go into
too much details here, but uh I lead the
audience growth team. We see about 20
billion Google page views a year in our
data. So, we have a lot of data. Uh we
have a view of what's working, what's
not working, what's happening on the
open web, [snorts] and
what no ser was a question. Does anybody
know what's going on? I I don't know
what's Everything is changing. Up is
down, left is right. Um, you know, I
thought I'd start my presentation with a
little um little vibe check on Wall
Street. Um, Angie's Q2 2025 earnings, I
think free search organic traffic, which
people often refer to as Google SEO,
it's probably a declining asset for most
businesses you talk to.
I think great. Uh, People, Inc.,
formerly dot dash. Um, we have a term we
use internally called Google Zero. What
happens if Google goes to zero? What
happens if Google no longer sends us
traffic?
ain't great either. Um,
Nerd Wallet, um, more people getting
answers without ever clicking through to
websites. That doesn't sound great. Um,
Fiverr, the CEO of Fiverr recently said
at a conference, "It feels outdated. I
mean, you put keywords, you get blue
links. That's weird. It feels like the
'9s."
Yeah. Okay, fair play. Um, AI search is
the biggest disruption we've seen to how
search fundamentally works uh than we've
ever is just like brand new to
everything is different. Everything has
changed. Um, however, that's ground and
a couple things. Got a couple data
points. Uh, one, this is a chart of
chatgbt traffic across the rapive
network. Again, we have 6,000 sites. Uh,
top 10 com score publisher, a lot of
page views. Um, that's a chart that goes
up and to the right pretty steeply. Um,
but it's also less than 0.2% of our
network traffic today.
Tiny tiny tiny tiny tiny tiny tiny tin
tiny tiny tiny tiny really tiny. Um, and
so uh you know yeah everything's
changing but like in terms of clicks, in
terms of volume of scale um uh it's not
quite there. Now caveat to this we
heavily index on media sites uh uh
creators publishers bloggers. We have a
lot of consumer demand and I'll talk
about the B2B side in a little bit where
things are a little bit different. Um
and so uh how can that be? Everyone's
using chatbt, right? We're all using it.
There's a whole conference about it. Um
what's going on, right? Well, it turns
out that most of the AI search usage is
additive to Google, right? There's a
couple things here. There's a um some
data and research from uh Spark Toro uh
and Datas. Um this this chart over here,
the blue line is Google search uh volume
over time. Google usage. Uh the purple
line is AI tools usage over time. And
while everyone is starting to use the AI
tools, it has not impacted Google usage
one bit. In fact, they did a a click
panel study. So there's a click panel
study of people that were not using
strateg,
right? And it showed that you went from
this panel, this this sample of panel
went from zero usage of uh chatbt to
five prompts a week. Those same people
in that time period went from 10 Googles
a week to 12 Googles a week.
So they started using chat GPT and they
Googled more. Right? This is for anyone
who can't do simple math 17ish. So
you've gone from 10 searches a week to
17 searches a week. This is exploding
what people are searching for. Search
usage is just off the charts. You can
search for things you never you could
never search for before. Um and we know
that pretty concretely. Um this is a uh
um a chart from some research that
CHAGBT just launched. I think it was
this week or last week um showing how
people use Chad GBPT. All kinds of
different prompt classifications. And
you know I'm not going to spend too much
time on all the details here. But the
TLDDR is that a lot of this is not
search. A lot of this has nothing to do
with search. Only some 20 30 40% of
these map to anything like we would have
considered search before. Right? It's
kind of like practical guidance pillar
tutoring teaching specific info. Those
are kind of like search relationships
and personal reflection that ain't
search. Um you know personal writing
communication translation that ain't
search. Um are just like radically
different right? Um and so uh you know
you could say okay you know clicks
aren't really happening from chat GBT
can we just ignore it like no no no
we can't ignore it. And I think everyone
knows that in the room but search is
radically changing. Um number one AI
product in the world is AI overviews
right? So, I think we're all familiar
with this. So, AI overviews, this is the
kind of summary that appears at the top
of Google. Um, answers the query for
you, which is partly why clicks are
going down. Um, hands up. Anyone
familiar with web guide from Google?
Google web guide.
Not a single hand in the room. Nobody.
Okay. Wow. Uh, this is in labs right
now. Experimental. You got to go turn it
on. This is uh in my opinion where
Google is headed with the future of
search. So, if you have any interest in
the future of search, go figure out how
to get access to web guide. Go turn it
on in labs and go play around with it.
Um, this is basically a um a rewritten
10 blue links. So, it has a bunch of
links, right? So, it's like an AI
version of a search results page. Um,
and I strongly believe that Google's
going to keep investing in this. Uh,
very interesting AI mode. Um, also, in
my professional
expert opinion, really bad. Um, sorry
about that if there's anyone from Google
in the room. Um, but AI mode is, you
know, Google's version of like chat GBT,
chat, search, etc. Um, just not really
very good right now. Um, in all kinds of
ways. Um, this is a recipe example uh
where I'm asking for recipes and it just
vomits a recipe at me. Um, remember just
reminder AI does not have fingers can't
cook. Um, uh, so lots of problematic
things there. And then Chad GPT
obviously perplexity. Um, we know search
is radically changing. Um, so how is
search changing? Well, those AI
overviews I showed you um are showing up
more and more and more since March 2025.
There was a big update Google made. Um
AI overviews are now more prevalent uh
almost twice as prevalent as they were
before. Um they appear on somewhere
between 30 and 40% of all search results
have an AI view at the top. And when
they show up at the top, clicks go down
20 to 40%.
So all of those statements from Wall
Street that I showed you at the
beginning of the presentation, this is
why uh we just ain't getting as many
clicks as we used to, right? Um we had
an era of clicks and that era is dying.
Uh AI mode, there was some a study done
um with some clickstream data again on
AI mode. AI mode sends six times fewer
clicks. So it doesn't matter where you
click, not just like position one, but
like total clicks out from the page on
AI [snorts] mode versus a search results
page is six times fewer. That's a lot
times fewer for again anyone that isn't
good at math. Um [snorts] so you know a
lot of things are changing. Uh again I
mentioned that we don't get a lot of
traffic from chat GBT on the consumer
side in any way shape or form but there
is some growing usage on the B2B side
right and this is not my data. This is
data from a web flow um webinar
recently. um they're seeing almost 8% of
total signups coming from AI bots,
right? And so um you know I think this
stage is in my mind like okay we're not
getting a lot of clicks now but
everything is changing right and what
happens in the B2B side eventually
trickles into the consumer side right
the B2B is kind of the the leading
indicator
and net net right the result is fewer
clicks right again this is a different
study that shows exactly the same data
point which is this kind [snorts] of
turquoise line over here this is the
rise of the number of searches on Google
that result in zero clicks out anywhere
to a non- Googlele property um just off
the charts. This chart is up and to the
right. Um
so that's kind of where we are, right?
Which is basically like nobody knows.
Everything is changing, right? Uh clicks
are going down incontrovertible. Um
believe that's going to continue to
happen. But three ideas that I want to
kind of anchor on back to Noah's point
of like okay, so what right? What do
what do we think about as we think about
the next 12, 18, 24 months uh of this um
this change? Number one, search eval.
Um,
how good is Google? Anybody know? Nobody
actually knows how good Google is except
Google because they are a monopoly. And
it has been in no one's interests to
actually benchmark Google against
anything else because the only other
thing you could benchmark it against was
Bing. And let's be clear, nobody's
bothering to do that. Um, in fact, in
the uh the recent uh antitrust trials,
the monopoly trials that Google was in,
um, I love this quote. This is a a quote
from the judge. In 2020, Google
conducted a quality degradation study
which showed that it would not lose
search revenue if it was to
significantly reduce the quality of it
search product. Google intentionally
made Google worse and nobody cared.
Right? This is literally the definition
of monopoly. Right? This is literally
like what happened was Google had zero
competition the longest time. Um and
because of that the entire ecosystem,
there is no independent third party that
tells you how good Google is, right? Is
Google getting better over time at
travel search? Nobody knows. Is Google
getting better over time at credit card
comparison? Nobody knows. Is Google
getting better at product search over
time. Nobody knows. Right? There is no
independent third party data study etc.
Um there is nothing. Um we need more of
this. Right? Now that we have actual
competition now that Chad GBT is here,
now the complexity here clause here, we
need real benchmarking and data and
insights into how good search is on
these different platforms and who does
it better, right? Um, this is a a blog
post from a company called Wallet Hub.
Total transparency, right? I have no
affiliation with them, but they, you
know, they do credit card comparisons,
so they're like a little bit self-
serving, but they did their own study
showing that if you if you search for
best zero APR credit cards, the the
dollar cost of making the wrong decision
of all the results that show up in
Google is expensive, right? Um,
obviously self- serving, they gave
themselves a zero dollar cost. They
think they have the best option, right?
Um, but this is exactly the kind of
methodology and the kind of thing that
we need more of, right? We need more of
these independent, this is not really
independent. Um, we need more non-
Googlele uh independent studies of how
good search is in different verticals.
Fun fact, for fun, I put, you know, best
zero APR credit cards in and CHBT nails
it with exactly the same uh best zero
APR credit card as Wallet Hub
recommends. I'm not a financial expert,
no transparency. I don't know if that is
actually the best result. Um but again
this is a single study from a single uh
uh you know independent um company. We
need more of this. Um this is some data
from a company called Exa.ai. Anyone
familiar with Exa.ai in the room? One
person. Okay, great. Uh lots of new
stuff for folks here. So Exa.ai, go
check it out. They're building a new
search engine from the ground up using
LLMs. Uh very different than lots of the
other approaches are out there like Chad
GBT and so on. And they have some really
interesting exciting things they're
doing. And there's a link down here to a
blog post which again I'm sure we'll
send the slides out etc after um uh
talking all about how they do search
evals. So they are one of the only
people talking about how to do search
evals. How to actually understand
whether a search result is good or not.
Did it answer the user's query? And I
love this right like I'm all for this. I
think EXA are doing amazing things. And
when you read this stuff it's like 101.
It's like how tall is the Eiffel Tower?
and they have the right answer and then
they're asking that question of ch and
they're like oh search seems pretty
good. It's like we are so far away from
having any clue as to how good this
stuff is at any kind of scale, any kind
of benchmarks, any kind of measurement.
We need better search evals. Okay, those
are the first thing. Second thing, um,
we're moving from an era of links,
right? Like I mentioned, links are kind
of going away everywhere to an era of
recommendations, right? And to Noah's
point about is it GEO, generative engine
optimization? Is it AIO? Is it AI, EI,
O, whatever the crappy acronym you want
to give it. Um, there are a ton of
hustle bros on LinkedIn that will try
and sell you the new GEO source. A lot
of like every single vendor under the
sun right now in the search space is
like, I got the GEO goodness. I got the
secrets. I got the new stuff. You got to
be changing your strategy. You got to be
doing all this kind of cool things. Like
this is a study that somebody did across
50 uh they compile 50 of those different
like GEO best practices. Extracted all
the advice for like what they're
recommending. figure out what GEO is
being recommended as structured content.
Comprehensive content. Listen, if you
were not writing comprehensive content
before and you think that because of
JGBT, oh now, now we should do the comp
like come on guys. Like this is beyond
ridiculous. Brand mentions in digital PR
again. If you were not doing brand
mentions in digital PR before and now
suddenly because of chat GPT somehow you
think this is like new strategy or new
information like I got a I got a igloo I
can send you sell you or something.
Anyway, um so uh to say it maybe less
politely um I love Lily Ray. She's a
friend of mine in the industry. So tired
of reading this crap, right? Uh again
this is like an example like SEO
playbook is dead. Here's what works. And
it's like it's all the same things that
used to work. Spoiler alert. Uh good
quality content uh is still the thing
that works. Um, now the wrinkle here and
and I kind of want to bring this up, you
know, hearken back to my gray hair and
the fact that I've been doing this a
long time. I remember when SEO was white
text on a white background, right? And
like spamming links with a with a link
vendor in India somewhere, right? Like
it was really spammy and like that stuff
worked and it was like that's what we
all did, right? That was SEO [snorts]
1.0, right? I'm compressing the timeline
here, bear with me. Um, SEO 2.0 you
could kind of consider as like oh like
real links have value. So people did
like content marketing and started to
understand like oh we should do real
outreach to get links from the good
spaces. We should try and do a bit of
digital PR. Um that was like the middle
era. And then what we've moved into in
the past like you know five years or so
is kind of SEO 3.0 right where Google's
measuring user intent. They're actually
using clickstream data from Android and
Chrome and understanding how people
actually engage and click uh real brand
signals click signals a compressed
timeline. But this was kind of how SEO
has evolved over time. um the GEO
timeline, right? It's like we are here.
We are in GEO 1.0. And what everyone is
recommending is like the thing that
works for GEO is you should write like a
LinkedIn article saying 10 best AI
vendors for CRM and then put yourself
number one. And that's what like
influences Chad GPT and like listen
it works. There's a little bit of this
that that actually works today, right?
There's a little bit of like, you know
what, you write a LinkedIn article, you
say 10 best for X for Y, and you put
yourself number one. Like, there's a
little bit of that that does actually
show up in these surface areas, but like
come on. Like, not for long, right?
Like, if this is what you're chasing,
and if this is what you're trying to
sell to any kind of executive team,
right? If you're trying to like convince
your CMO or your CEO or your CFO that we
should suddenly be spending against this
thing, like hang on a second. Hang on.
Right? This is not going to last for
long, right? and it is exceptionally
uh dumb I think right so again a little
bit of it works right everyone's going
to try and figure out how to do it uh
the right way um but here's what I think
is really going on and where you really
need to pay attention right the age of
10 blue links is done we we are going to
get to an era very quickly I think where
we are never ever going to see a kind of
naive blue link and I use blue link as
like the kind of like standard of like
current Google search results like a
like a kind of hey here's a link that
answers your questions but like might be
relevant to the thing you were asking
about. We are never going to see one of
those ever again. And what instead we're
going to see and this is a screenshot
from that Google web guide I was talking
about. And the difference here is like
this is the kitchen which is a a recipe
media site uh in regular Google, right?
And this description of the link comes
directly from the page. This is the
metad description, right? This is like
basic stuff, simple stuff. We've been in
this era forever, right? This is how
Google has worked for a very very long
time. This is web guide and it looks
pretty similar but this is now a
descriptive uh piece of text written by
AI about why this link is relevant to
the thing you search for. This is like a
like it's a small conceptual change but
changes everything. We're never ever
going to see again Google or any or chat
or anyone kind of putting a link there
and being like maybe it was this.
Instead it's going to be like no it's
this and there's five reasons why.
Right? This kind of contextual
recommendation changes everything.
Right? Right? And this is going to be
the future. And so the future is um
okay, so how do you get it to recommend
this thing? How do you get it to say uh
uh the thing that says this is relevant
to um what you're searching for? And I
actually think we're going to see a lot
more links come back, right? So links
have kind of gone away, but these
recommendations I think are going to be
part of the future. Um and this is
opinionated, right? like n of one but
any prompt you give Gemini chaji PT and
so on like it's almost always better if
you just ask it for links so like the
thing that you were going to ask for
right so this is an example from recipes
like I'm making spiralized zucchini
salad how do I make it tasty gives you
some ideas right or I'm making
spiralized zucchini salad how do I make
it tasty also give me some links and and
it does a great job like it gives you
the stuff but then it also says hey
here's a simple zucchini salad that you
might want to uh check out as a recipe
here's a creamy Greek salad here's and
all the recipes uh Greeks out and then
obviously off the bottom of the screen
is like creamy and cheesy. Gives you
different options but it gives you
links, right?
Why doesn't this happen more,
right? Why aren't we seeing more links
in results? Because I think links are
good. I'm biased. Like I'm a fan of the
open web. I work at a company called
Raptive. We care about the open web.
I've been blogging for a long time. I'm
a weird nerd. I like links. But I think
this is better. And honestly, a lot of
the reason we don't see more links in
places like AI overviews in particular
is speed.
Google can't do this fetching the links,
understanding them, adding the
contextual links back in time, right?
And again, that web guide experience
that I mentioned to you earlier, Google
Web Guide is really slow. Takes like
three or four seconds to generate the
web guide response. That's a technical
limitation which is going to get solved
as we go forward.
Um, I'm running out of time, so I'm
going to keep speeding along. Um, again,
to kind of illustrate this point, um,
and not to pick on 1800 Flowers. I have
no affiliation uh with them, but um, I
was trying to think of an example of
like a company that ranks really well in
Google search today that is going to
have a hard time in the era of AI
search. And it's things like this where
it's like, you know, I say, should I buy
flowers for 1800 Flowers? Uh, Chad GBC
is like, if I were you, for a onetime
gift convenience, eh, sure. But if it's
a special occasion like you probably
want to go to like a local florist or
something like that and I can help you
out with that. Right? This is the future
of AI search. Not about spamming some
LinkedIn article with like 10 best X for
Y. It's about actually understanding why
your brand is differentiated in the
market. What is the value prop to the
consumer and then making sure that that
is out there everywhere. Like this kind
of like brand marketing, right? Product
marketing, understanding value prop,
understanding the the landscape, that is
the future of search, right? And if
you're stuck there trying to like
optimize like a bunch of directory links
like we were in like 1999, right? Like I
got news for you like that isn't you
have no viable career in front of you,
right? Like the entirety of like AI
search is going to get taken over by
people who understand brand marketing,
persuasion, value prop, uh and more. Uh
I'm going to slip this slide because
it's kind of complicated and I'm running
out of time. Um, and so like my last
point here about moving from links to
recommendations is, you know, literally
the trillion dollar question, right?
Because Google is a big company and
advertising, search advertising is a big
thing is like for the longest time,
Google has been able to link to
suboptimal products. They've been like,
"Hey, here's a bunch of links. Maybe you
might like some of them. Maybe some of
them are good. Maybe some of them are
bad. I don't know. Like click them and
find out." Right?
You can link to sub-optimal products,
but can you recommend them? Right? And
so again, this is an example from uh
I've tried to blur out the actual
example is like a uh a vehicle history
report website. Search vehicle history
reports on Google. This website is
number one. You ask AI mode, should I
use it? And it says, no, no, no, no, no.
Do not use this. This is not the right
thing. There's like official government
places you can go and so on. Um, so this
is really like a radical rethinking of
like search is going to really really
change and advertising is going to be
this weird thing because again you can't
recommend a bad product but
recommendations is going to be the
future of this space. So um all right I
got one last thing because I'm over
time. Um
I guess I shouldn't have left this for
last. Um is the web going to survive?
Anybody know guesses?
>> Yes. All right. Great. I I love the
enthusiasm. Um I'm I'm hopeful. Uh is
the web going to survive? Um, this is my
last slide, so so bear with me. There's
actually a lot going on in this chart.
This is some some some data from chart
beats. Um, let's first pay attention to
this this dark blue line down here. This
is um uh over 2,000 news and media
websites with the Google search traffic.
You can see that as Google AI overviews
roll out. Search traffic is declining,
right? We saw that in the the Wall
Street quotes from earlier. Search is a
declining asset uh across media and news
sites, continuing to go down. Will the
web survive? Maybe, maybe not. clicks
are going to go down for a little bit
further. I think eventually I think
they'll they'll stabilize, but they're
going to go down. But Google Discover,
anybody know what Google Discover is?
Couple people. Okay. Google Discover is
the recommended articles feed of Google.
Shows up like on your on your lock
screen on um Android uh inside the
Google app on iOS. Google Discover is
growing in traffic. And I actually think
the future of AI search is entirely
backwards. We the whole thing we're
talking about us prompting the AI and
getting a response. The future is going
to be it coming to you.
Think about how much JBT knows about you
and how good its recommendations would
be. Tuesday morning 9:00 a.m. it's like,
"Hey, you're speaking at a conference
day. Here's five things you might want
to know. Here's relevant to everything
that we've talked about. I have my
entire life history. I'm using this
thing for therapy for crying out loud,
right?" Like, it knows everything about
me and it's going to get so good at
recommended content. So, I'm actually
bullish. I think the open web's going to
survive. Search is going to continue to
decline. Discover is going to explode.
What happens next? Anybody's guess.
Thank you.
[music]